It's an interesting little side note, and that is that
Along about the time that we were struggling with our PhD program and getting it approved by the university, we ran into a situation where one day George Bass and John Calhoun were in a car together going up to Dallas to an INA board meeting, that's the Institute of Nautical Archaeology, because John Calhoun was a board member, George had assigned him to a board member.
And on the way up, George and John Calhoun were talking, and Calhoun said, well, listen, you know, I think that if you were to apply for a PhD in nautical archaeology, then the coordinating board would probably pass it a lot faster because there is no PhD in the state in nautical archaeology.
So George came back with this idea, saying that he no longer wanted to pursue the PhD in anthropology, and he wanted to immediately apply for a PhD in nautical archaeology.
Well, oh my lord, you know, that's all I needed.
And it took quite a bit of conjoling and quite a bit of convincing to finally get George to come back around to getting the PhD in anthropology.
Of course, our interest was that we wanted it to be a little broader than nautical because we wanted to offer PhDs in some of the other fields as well.
Eventually, though, in 1989, we were able to get the PhD in anthropology.
By that time, do you have any idea how many masters graduates you had produced?
We had been going along a pretty good clip.
Once we got the master's program, very shortly, I mean within a couple of years, we had a hundred people majoring in a graduate program in anthropology.
In fact, we had more people in the graduate program than we had in the undergraduate program.
The undergraduate program topped out, and even today,
is somewhere around 100 to 120 majors.
It hit that number back in the 70s, late 70s, and it's been fairly stable ever since.
The undergraduate.
Undergraduate program, the number of majors has remained consistent between like 100 and 120.
You know, 10 graduate and 10 more come in.
So it's unbelievable.
No matter what we seem to do, we can't seem to increase those numbers at the undergraduate level.
Can you generalize about those students?
Where are they from within the geographic area, boys, male, female?
You mean undergraduates?
Mm-hmm.
About two-thirds of them are female.
There are a higher number of females and males that generally major in anthropology.
They cut across all spectrums.
Most of them, of course, come from Texas, one place or another.
We have had a few minorities.
To my knowledge and my memory, we've only had maybe only one or two minorities.
Afro-Americans that have ever majored in anthropology.
We've had a number of Hispanics, though, and, of course, Asians, a lot of Asians and stuff like that.
But what are their career goals, as far as you know?
Well, you know, it's varied.
Some of them, of course, plan to go on to graduate school, but a lot of them were just planning to get an anthropology degree because they enjoyed it, like your son.
because they enjoyed anthropology and wanted, you know, a bachelor's degree.
In fact, Troya Walling, who is down here at the, he's sort of the spokesman for the Bryan Police Department, has a bachelor's degree in anthropology.
One of the sergeants who works for Wyatt over here in the university security has a degree.
His name's Joe something, I can't remember, but he's got an anthropology degree.
At one time, a vice president of a small oil drilling company in Bakersfield, California, was an anthropology graduate.
A woman, as a matter of fact.
For a short while, she was the vice president of this drilling company.
And, of course, a lot of them have gone into the military.
And, you know, so it's cut across a wide spectrum.
I mean, we've had people who have gone on to law degrees and medicine and things like that.
So what were the most, what became the most popular undergraduate courses in enrollment numbers?
Well, Introduction to Anthropology, which of course is the beginning course, was probably one of the more widely sought after courses in terms of sort of a basic course that a lot of freshmen took, a lot of sophomores.
North American Indians attracted a lot of people.
In more recent times, peoples and cultures of the world has been getting a tremendous enrollment, in fact, four or five hundred a semester.
But the reason for that is because the business college requires all of their students to have three hours of an international elective.
And this is one of 16 courses that they can take.
And it is the only course on there that lists it at the 200 level.
And so a lot of students take this in business to satisfy that elective.
So those are the, I would say, the more popular courses.
Archaeology is, of course, always interested in them.
Some of the other courses, you know, get a fair representation, but not like those introductory courses.
As far as you know, according to campus student mythology, what is the reputation of anthropology on the campus?
Well, I can give you some very good insights on that.
This last semester, in the spring semester, when I taught two sections of, no, I taught one large section of 275 Introduction to Anthropology students, I remember, and this is traditional,
towards the end of the semester, you never see too many students during the semester, but towards the end of the semester, there's a whole horde of them that come by because they want to know how they can pass the course or how they can get a B or an A or whatever they're seeking.
And they want to know how to study for the final exam and all of this kind of stuff.
So the last few weeks of school, you see lots and lots of students.
A fair number of them, I would ask them why they're doing so poorly.
And they would say, well, I'm a business major.
This isn't the kind of material that I'm used to studying.
Or somebody told me that this would be an easy elective.
so that when I was taking accounting and management, I could kind of coast through this course.
Other remarks was, well, if you wouldn't cover so much material, I could have done much better in this course.
You cover just too much material.
Another one would say, you require too much reading in this course, and so forth.
So, yes, I think that, I think there is a,
an undercurrent out there somewhere for whatever reason of people thinking that this is an easy course to get a grade in.
And it's like any other course, it's not.
And I love to challenge these students.
I say, well, have you taken American history?
Oh, yes, I made it be in American history.
I said, well, my lord, American history has got so much detail in it.
I said, anthropology doesn't have nearly as much detail to remember.
I said, I can't remember American history.
And there was a tremendous number of stuff I had to remember.
So how in the world are you doing so poorly in this class?
Well, anyway.
But that's another thing I found very interesting as my, during my position as department head when I would go over and look at the grading, the grades that were assigned in the courses and then the
evaluation scores of the professors.
Now, like you, I've earned a watch for excellent teaching.
I consider myself a very good teacher, and yet I find that when I teach these very large sections, like 275, 300, I've taught as many as 375 a section, no matter what I do, no matter how hard I try, my teaching scores are not nearly as good as they were when I was teaching under 100.
In fact, my teaching scores this last semester were, in my mind, abysmal.
They were like 4.0 instead of like 4.2 or 4.4.
The other thing I have discovered in looking over when I was department head, there was almost a direct correlation between the course grade average and the evaluation.
One faculty member that I will not name was teaching a course of 300 students
and the class average was B.
And he had a 4.73 in his class of 300, when I had a class of 275 at a 4.0, but my class average was middle C. And so, anyway, I don't know how, you know, I don't know how to do this.
But, yes, I think to answer your question from the long point of view, I do think that a lot of students believe that anthropology is a grade point course.
Have you heard of any nicknames for the anthropology program on the campus?
I've never heard of an Aggie nickname for anthropology.
If there has been one, I haven't heard of it.
No, I don't know of one.
As you, looking back in your own work now, when you got here, there were those first few four or five projects.
Then for you personally, what were some other major steps in your research?
your researchers, yourself, your own projects?
Well, in those early days, I was very busy just trying to
Well, let's see.
The best way to put this would be that in the early days, I was doing a lot to try to make anthropology look good.
Trying to get programs started, trying to hire good faculty, trying to get degree programs, trying to get various kinds of grants, contracts, and so forth.
Nevertheless, along the way, I thought I was fairly successful in continuing a very active personal research program.
I had the good fortune that
in palynology or the study of pollen, a lot of times I don't have to go into the field for very long.
I can go into the field and collect samples in a week or so and come back and I can spend the rest of the year looking at the samples in the laboratory under a microscope.
So I had the good fortune where I could spend a lot of my time in the laboratory and also at the same time was able to do all my administrative work.
And so I didn't have to spend these great long lengths of time in the field.
I got into, you know, I made my claim to fame was in crap.
You know, human fecal material.
When did you get there?
Well, you know, that's another one of these serpendipitous things.
When I was working on my Ph.D., I was really doing, and I was in botany, and I was really doing a paleo-environmental history of the state of Texas.
I was looking at what I could reconstruct
as the major vegetational changes within the state during the last 30,000 years using material from peat bogs and lakes and deposits all over the state and trying to use the pollen as an indicator for vegetations and climates in the past.
At the same time,
There was an archaeologist by the name of Bob Alexander who was excavating the site in West Texas.
And it was a dry rock shelter.
And he had found a large number of human fecal remains.
And he wanted to know if somebody would look at these and tell them what was in them.
This was back in the late 60s.
So my mentor, Dr. Larson in botany, said, hey, he came in one day and he handed me this box of these fecal materials and said, here, do this.
And I said, what do you mean do this?
I said, I'm in the middle of writing my dissertation.
He said, no, no, do this too.
He said, this is a good experience.
And he said, you're interested in archaeology.
This is archaeology.
Well, at the time, there was only one individual in the world who was doing this, and that was Eric Callan at the University of McGill in Canada.
He was the only person in the world doing this stuff.
So I went to McGill for three days.
worked with Eric Callan, learned how to do all this stuff, came back and then processed about 65 of these things and included them as part of my dissertation.
That's another long story.
When I finished my analysis, I gave them to the guy and he was actually working on his PhD in anthropology at the same time and he was going to incorporate this into his PhD and
My mentor, Dr. Larson, said, well, we're not going to let him get credit for those.
So he said, we'll put them in your dissertation.
So my dissertation looks kind of weird.
It's got three quarters of it.
All has to do with the prehistory of the state of Texas, environmental history.
Then all of a sudden it says, oh, and by the way,
I've also looked at prehistoric diet.
But anyway, that got me into the field of looking at crap.
Dr. Callan died in 1970 of a heart attack, and so I was the only student trained to do this stuff.
I wrote an article for the Scientific American, which was published in 1971,
And even to this day, I got more requests for reprints from that article than I've gotten from some of my more scholarly stuff.
So that, that for you as a young faculty member was a big step.
What was the next big step?
Well, from there on, I was doing not only a lot of work in
prehistoric diets, and I did that for quite a few years, looking at sites in South America and Mexico and all over the United States, and trained a number of students in this discipline.
But then for 15 years, I was a botany, I was a member of the Department of Botany here at Texas A&M.
Actually, it was, I can't remember, Van something.
Anyway, when I first got here, it was very interesting.
When I first got here, I'd gone over to the botany department and I told them I had a PhD in botany and I would like some kind of recognition or joint appointment or something.
They were totally uninterested.
Went back over to anthropology and was doing my business.
And four or five years later, I saw an ad in the Chronicle of Higher Education.
The botany department at Texas A&M University was looking for a palynologist.
And I went over there and I said, hey, what the hell's going on?
I said, you know, I've been over here talking.
Well, you know.
Anyway, so they canceled the ad and hired me as a third time.
in biology, and I remained that way for 15 years and taught all of my, in fact, the first 10 PhDs I graduated were in botany.
They were all in botany before we had a program in anthropology.
Anyway.
Don't I remember a good story about your going to Peru, getting some human fecal materials, and having a problem with the airport in New Orleans or something?
Yes, that's true.
Share that with this machine.
Excuse me.
On one of my scientific adventures, I went to Peru because Dr. Callan had been working in Peru and had died of a heart attack, and so I took over his project in Peru, and we were looking for, really, the origins of agriculture and prehistoric diets and so forth of the people that lived in the Andes of Peru.
thousands of years ago, working with Dr. Robert McNeish, who was at Calgary University at the time.
Anyway,
So I went down and excavated all summer, and I decided I would take all these back to Texas A&M to analyze this stuff.
And I had five suitcases full of these, what they call coprolites, C-O-P-R-O-L-I-T-E-S, which is really prehistoric feces.
And there was Braniff Airways.
That was a memorable flight because leaving Ayacucho, which is up in the mountains at about 11,000 feet,
the plane only came in once a week.
And they used these old Convair DC, well, Convair, whatever they were, I don't know, four-engine planes.
They were not pressurized.
And the runway was a short strip of dirt runway that fell off into a valley.
And literally, because of the elevation, high elevation, the planes could land okay, but they couldn't take off.
So they would race down the runway, get a little bit of elevation just as they hit the end of the runway, and then they would careen down into the valley, diving into the valley, picking up speed to get enough airspeed so that they could then come out of the valley.
And so taking off in the airplane, very often you would see trucks above you.
You could look up on the road above you out the window and see trucks as the plane was diving in the valley, and you always hoped they developed enough speed.
So I got to Lima and loaded all these bags on the airplane in Lima, and the Brandiff Airways at the time stopped in New Orleans to go through customs because for some reason Houston didn't have a customs agent at that time.
This was back in the early 70s.
So anyway, we stopped at about 2 o'clock in the morning, and we landed in...
in New Orleans.
We unloaded all the bags, and they went through all of the bags, and I was one of the last ones to, they were going through the bags.
And anyway, I opened, you know, I was sleepy and tired, and the guy said, what do you have in here?
I said, just a bunch of crap, you know.
And in fact, it really was.
I opened up these suitcases and he said, what are these things?
This bag after bag after bag full of these little samples.
And he looked at a couple of them and he said, is this what I think it is?
And I said, yes, it is.
He said, well, what in the world are you doing?
He had no understanding of what I was trying to do.
Well, he got very upset and he said, well, we can't let you into the country with this.
He said, there could be all kinds of things in here.
It could be viruses and bacteria.
and all kinds of harmful diseases.
And I said, but these things are thousands of years old.
I said, none of that stuff is still alive in these things.
Anyway, he was not going to let me through customs.
And I said, well, I'm not leaving here without my suitcases.
I said, I've spent all summer collecting these, and these are priceless pieces of information, and I've got to have them.
Everybody was back on the airplane.
By this time, I was...
talking to the pilot, the co-pilot, and one of the stewardesses were standing there next to me trying to get the customs guy to release me because the plane was already late taking off from New Orleans and everybody else was already on board.
And I kept insisting that I was not going to get on board without my suitcases and I was going to sue Braniff Airlines if they left me in New Orleans.
And I was getting really aggravated at the time.
Well, finally the guy said, all right, I'll tell you what.
He said, we'll call a guy from agriculture over here because he said, I can see that there are some plant remains here.
He said, I can see some leaves sticking out of some of these things and some seeds.
So it took a while to round up the guy from agriculture.
They woke him up, got him down there.
And by now, it was almost an hour late after the plane was supposed to have taken off for Houston.
The guy from agriculture showed up, and I got to talking to him.
And you can't see this on the tape, but I have a University of Texas ring on my hand.
And I got to talking to him, and I noticed that he had an A&M ring on.
So I very casually turned my ring around so that he couldn't see it.
And I kept making this big point about these were going to Texas A&M University.
And he eventually said, well, if it's going to Texas A&M, that's okay.
And so he told the guys to go ahead and let me back on the airplane with all my crap.
And to this day, I'm very grateful that there happened to be an Aggie who happened to be in the Agricultural Customs Office in New Orleans at 2 o'clock in the morning on that fateful day.
Otherwise, I wouldn't have ended up back in Houston or A&M with the stuff.
As you look back now on all these years of 30 years plus of research,
Of which of the research projects are you most proud?
Well, I've done a number of things.
I feel that, of course, I was one of the pioneers in this coprolite prehistoric diet information.
Callan, more or less, did the original pioneering work, but after he died, I've been working in the field for nearly 30 years, trained a number of students, have done a lot of reports, and in fact, it's interesting that in this week's science,
There is an article.
I am the joint author on an article that is being submitted to science by a guy named Ponier, who is an Austrian, and several other people.
And what we're actually doing now is extracting DNA.
from coprolites and using DNA to actually identify what these people were eating.
So by using PCR, using the DNA enhancer PCR and so forth, they're getting at this in a different way.
I mean, we, the old days, what we used to do is we processed these things and we would look for actual traces of leaves and traces of seeds and bones and feathers and hair.
But they're going at it from the DNA's point of view, and they're also doing steroid tests to try to sex these, to try to decide whether or not they have high levels of testosterone or estrogen in them, so they can tell whether they're male or female, and if for any chance they happen to have bled into the colon,
We can even get blood type.
So this is sort of really a whole new area.
I am not really in this area.
This is all beyond my expertise.
But nevertheless, I'm still involved in helping these people put all of this information together.
So I'm still active in that.
But along the way, I had several students in botany who became very interested in malicious palynology, or honey research.
And I got a call one day from the Office of the Inspector General in Washington in the sense that for a long time there was a honey subsidy program in the sense that in an effort to encourage people to raise bees, the United States government would agree to buy honey at a specified price, which was in most years higher than the world market price.
The only condition was it had to be honey that was domestically produced.
Most people were, in fact, complying with the regulations.
But, as always, there were a few people who were going off to other countries and buying honey, particularly in Mexico, where they could buy it for two or three cents a pound cheaper.
They would then repackage it and sell it to the federal government as domestic honey, making two or three cents a pound.
Well, if you've got two or three hundred thousand pounds of the stuff, you know, it makes a big profit.
So the Office of the Inspector General periodically would go through and sample drums of honey that they bought to try to determine if they were domestic or not.
And so for about 10 years, I did all of their investigative work in trying to determine the origin of where the honey came from.
They would just send me a sample and they said, where did this come from?
And so I became fairly good at trying to decide where in the United States or if it was in the United States.
And this is what led me into forensics.
This, in essence, was forensics.
I mean, I was doing studies of honey.
that would eventually result in litigation, I found on average about 6% of the samples I looked at did in fact look like they were not domestic.
So roughly 5% to 6%, I guess, of the honey that was sold to the federal government was not domestic.
But this got me into forensics, and it turns out that there are very few people in the United States, probably not more than four or five people in the United States, that do forensic palynology.
In other words, using pollen
to solve criminal cases or, in fact, civil cases.
And so I've gotten into forensics, and I've sort of pioneered that in the United States.
There's not a big demand for it, mainly because a lot of legal officers either don't know about it or are not willing to try it.
I have done some forensic cases.
I'm working on a book right now on forensic palynology, and also one on militia palynology of the United States.
In other words, the honey of the United States.
I have over 700 samples that we have collected and analyzed from every state in the United States, and we're trying to come up with a
overview of what the domestic honey sources are for the United States.
So those are two projects that I'm working on.
So if you ask me, you know, what am I the most proud of, I don't know.
I mean, I think the fact that I have
sort of pioneered those two fields, at least the United States.
And then there's a third field called entomopalinology, which is the study of bugs and pollen.
One of my graduate students was, again, of serpendipity.
A guy by the name of Pete Lingram, who was high up in the USDA, working in Oklahoma.
Call me up one day and he said, I got a problem.
He said, I have been collecting corn earworm moths up here in Oklahoma.
The corn earworm moth is the guy that lays the eggs that turns into a little worm that when you open up your ear of corn, sometimes you see a little worm that has been eating the kernels of corn.
That's a corn earworm.
And they create a tremendous amount of damage every year to corn crops all over the Midwest and elsewhere.
Anyway, he said, I've got a real problem.
He says, these corn earworm moths are showing up here in Oklahoma.
And he says, I know that they cannot winter here because they can't survive freezing temperatures.
So he said, they're coming from someplace, and I don't know where they're coming from.
But he said that we know enough about these things that we know that they are nectar feeders.
They feed on nectar.
And so I said, do you think that maybe they might have some pollen on them or something?
I said, I don't know, but I'll be certainly willing to take a look.
Turned out that he had contacted two or three other palynologists before me, and all of them have turned them down.
They didn't want to mess with it.
So anyway, he sent me about a thousand moths that they had collected in Oklahoma, and we pioneered...
the procedure whereby we could, you know, find moss, find the pollen on the moss.
And it turned out we tried doing this with a dissecting scope and couldn't.
We had to go to the SEM, the scanning electron microscope.
There was a lot of hassle and a lot of work in the early days, but we finally figured out how to do it.
And one thing led to another, and we eventually were able to tell Dr. Lindgren that the moss were coming from northern Mexico.
and from the valley of Texas.
Why?
Because they were loaded with citrus pollen, and there is no citrus pollen in Oklahoma.
In fact, there's no citrus pollen in College Station.
It all grows in the valley.
So this then opened up a whole new area for the USDA.
And one of my graduate students, Gretchen Jones, who got a PhD in working with pollen in botany, was then hired by the USDA as a full-time palynologist to explore this problem.
And she still works over here in the USDA, across the tracks over by the vet school, where she's working full-time, helping to identify not only corn earworms, but it turns out that the boll weevil also is a big pollen eater, and this is how they survive over the winter.
in areas that later become cotton fields, the pollen all went along.
Pollen is a real good source of protein as well as carbohydrates and fats.
So anyway, animal palynology, malicious palynology, forensic palynology, archaeological palynology, and then, of course, in more recent years, because I finally convinced George Bass to start looking at pollen in shipwrecks.
And I've had two PhD students who finish now.
who have done pollen analyses of underwater shipwrecks.
In other words, looking at soils that were trapped in the bilges, looking at soils that were trapped in cargoes like